.\" Manpage for the HyprZinc app-definition TOML format.
.\" View without installing:  man -l man/hyprzinc-app.5
.TH HYPRZINC-APP 5 "June 2026" "HyprZinc" "HyprZinc Manual"
.SH NAME
hyprzinc-app \- HyprZinc app-definition file format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I ~/.config/hyprzinc/apps/<name>.toml
.SH DESCRIPTION
A HyprZinc app definition is a single
.BR TOML (5)
file describing one rootless-container application:
.RB its " image, the Wayland and audio access it gets, its network egress policy,"
its mounts and keys, and any extra capabilities. The same rules are checked when the
file is saved and when the app is launched, so a stored app and a launched app can
never disagree.
.PP
Edit definitions with
.B hzc tui
(the form covers common fields; the "advanced" row opens the raw TOML in
.BR $EDITOR ),
or by hand. Validate with
.BR "hzc validate " \fIname\fR | \fIapp.toml\fR.
All problems are reported together, not just the first.
.PP
Field references below cite sections of
.I docs/architecture.md
.RB (e.g. " §5.5" ).
.SH TOP LEVEL
.TP
.B schema_version
Integer. Must be
.BR 1 .
.SH "[app]"
.TP
.B name
String, required. Lowercase
.RB [ a\-z0\-9._\- ],
must start alphanumeric. Becomes the container name.
.TP
.B image
String, required. The container image. A third-party image
.I must
be pinned by a canonical digest \(em
.RB \(lq @sha256: \(rq
plus exactly 64 lowercase hex characters; only locally built
.IR trusted-* " images may use a mutable local tag (§5.5)."
Must be a single-line reference (no whitespace or control characters). Use
.B hzc image resolve
to obtain the pinned form.
.TP
.B command
Array of strings. Argv appended after the image, overriding the image's default
command
.RB ( CMD ).
Empty uses the image default. Required when
.B multiterminal
is set (the default command cannot be replayed into each terminal).
.TP
.B install
String. Build-time setup run as a
.B RUN
layer atop
.B image
to produce a
.I derived
image
.RB ( "FROM image + RUN install" );
empty runs the image directly (§5.5).
.TP
.B preset
String. One of
.IR strict ", " standard ", " networked .
A starting
.I template
only \(em every field stays independently overridable. See
.BR PRESETS .
.TP
.B description ", " icon
Strings. Human-readable label and icon name.
.TP
.B terminal
Boolean. CLI/TUI app: launch inside a terminal-emulator window.
.TP
.B multiterminal
Boolean. Terminal app with a long-lived holder so many terminals can attach to one
instance; the container lives until the last terminal closes. Requires
.B terminal
and an explicit
.BR command .
.TP
.B background
Boolean. Keep running detached. A plain
.B terminal
app cannot also be background; with
.B multiterminal
it means "keep the shared container alive after the last terminal closes".
.TP
.B autostart
Boolean. Start the app automatically.
.TP
.B autostart_workspace
Integer, must be
.BR ">= 0" " (" 0 " = no preference)."
.SH "[display]"
.TP
.B wayland
String, required.
.I security-context
(default; tag the app's Wayland connection \(em label-only today, no runtime enforce,
see §5.2) or
.IR passthrough .
.TP
.B gpu
Boolean. Expose the host GPU
.RI ( /dev/dri ).
A dry-run warns when set.
.SH "[network]"
.TP
.B mode
String, required.
.IR none ", " pasta ", or " container .
Fields belonging to one mode are rejected under the others, so a stale allowlist
left after a mode switch cannot silently read as "applied".
.PP
.RB "When " "mode = pasta" " \(em egress allowlist, enforced by"
.BR nftables (8)
in the netns before the app starts (§5.3):
.TP
.B ipv4_cidr ", " ipv6_cidr
Arrays of CIDR strings; each must be a valid CIDR in its family. An all-egress entry
.RB ( 0.0.0.0/0 ", " ::/0 )
is allowed but warned about (the allowlist is then effectively open).
.TP
.B ports
Array of integers, each
.BR 1\-65535 .
.TP
.B interface
String. Host interface for egress. Charset
.RB [ A\-Za\-z0\-9._\- ]
only (no commas or spaces \(em they would splice extra options into the pasta
invocation).
.TP
.B block_dns
Boolean. Block DNS egress (a leak guard meaningful only with an egress allowlist).
.PP
.RB "When " "mode = container" :
.TP
.B target
String, required in this mode. Name of the container whose network namespace to
join; charset
.RB [ a\-z0\-9._\- ],
must start alphanumeric. Existence is verified at launch.
.SH "[[mounts]]"
An array of tables, each a bind mount.
.TP
.B host ", " container
Strings, required. Host path and in-container path. Neither may contain
.RB \(lq : \(rq,
.RB \(lq , \(rq,
or whitespace/control characters \(em those would shift Podman's
.B \-v
field layout (e.g. claim
.I ro
but actually mount
.IR rw ).
.TP
.B mode
String, required.
.IR ro " or " rw .
.SH "[keys]"
A convenience layer for SSH/GPG keys: unlike
.BR [[mounts]] ,
it also wires the agent socket and enforces
.B 0600
inside the container.
.TP
.B ssh ", " gpg
Arrays of host key paths. Each is subject to the same metacharacter rejection as
mount paths
.RB ( "no " : ", " , ", or whitespace)."
.SH "[audio]"
.TP
.B pipewire
Boolean. Grant PipeWire access.
.TP
.B legacy_alsa
Boolean. Expose the host sound device
.RI ( /dev/snd ).
A dry-run warns when set.
.SH "[theme]"
.TP
.B mode
String, required.
.IR host " (inherit the host theme) or " none .
.SH "[capabilities]"
.TP
.B extra
Array of strings. Linux capabilities re-added past the
.B cap-drop all
baseline, passed to
.BR "podman --cap-add" .
Each entry must match
.RB \(lq (CAP_)?[A\-Z_]+ \(rq
.RB "(e.g. " NET_ADMIN " or " CAP_NET_ADMIN );
granting
.B ALL
is forbidden. A dry-run warns whenever any are set.
.SH "[depends_on]"
.TP
.B containers
Array of strings. Other apps/containers to start first.
.SH PRESETS
Presets seed these starting values; every field stays overridable afterwards (§4):
.PP
.RS
.nf
field             strict             standard      networked
\-\-\-\-\-             \-\-\-\-\-\-             \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-      \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
network.mode      none               none          pasta
network.block_dns \-                  \-             true
display.wayland   security-context   passthrough   passthrough
display.gpu       false              false         false
audio.pipewire    false              false         false
theme.mode        host               host          host
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B strict
is the default for a newly created app.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.nf
schema_version = 1

[app]
name        = "firefox"
image       = "docker.io/library/firefox@sha256:0000\&...\&0000"  # 64 hex, §5.5
preset      = "strict"
description = "Web browser"
icon        = "firefox"

[display]
wayland = "security-context"
gpu     = false

[network]
mode = "none"

[audio]
pipewire    = false
legacy_alsa = false

[theme]
mode = "host"

[capabilities]
extra = []

[depends_on]
containers = []
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hzc (1),
.BR podman (1),
.BR nftables (8)
.PP
HyprZinc architecture (single source of truth):
.I docs/architecture.md
