.\" Manpage for hzc, HyprZinc's container-definition tool.
.\" View without installing:  man -l man/hzc.1
.TH HZC 1 "June 2026" "HyprZinc" "HyprZinc Manual"
.SH NAME
hzc \- HyprZinc container-definition tool (define, validate, and launch rootless app containers)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hzc
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.PP
.B hzc tui
.br
.B hzc new
.I name
.B \-\-image
.I ref
.RB [ \-\-preset
.IR strict | standard | networked ]
.RB [ \-\-desc
.IR d ]
.RB [ \-\-icon
.IR i ]
.br
.B hzc list
.br
.B hzc validate
.IR name | app.toml
.br
.B hzc run
.IR name | app.toml
.RB [ \-\-exec ]
.br
.B hzc build
.IR name | app.toml
.br
.B hzc image
.RB { search | resolve }
.I arg
.br
.B hzc keys
.RB { list | show | set | edit | validate | path }
.RI [ arg ]
.br
.B hzc term
.I name
.RB [ \-\-shell ]
.br
.B hzc
.RB { stop | restart | inspect }
.I name
.br
.B hzc logs
.I name
.RB [ \-f ]
.br
.B hzc delete
.I name
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hzc
("hyprzinc container") is the keyboard-first manager for HyprZinc app containers.
Each app is one TOML definition under
.IR ~/.config/hyprzinc/apps/ ;
see
.BR hyprzinc-app (5)
for the format.
.B hzc
launches every app as a rootless Podman container with a least-privilege baseline
.RB ( "--security-opt no-new-privileges --cap-drop all" )
and, for egress-filtered apps, an
.BR nftables (8)
allowlist locked into the network namespace
.I before
the app starts.
.PP
.B hzc
does not run Go or Podman at build time of itself; it drives the host's
.BR podman (1)
at runtime. The TUI and the CLI share one launch code path, so an app launches
identically however it is started.
.SS Argument resolution
Commands that take an app accept either a store
.I name
or a file. An argument that contains
.RB \(lq / \(rq
or ends in
.RB \(lq .toml \(rq
is read directly as a file; otherwise it is looked up in the store.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B tui
Open the full-screen, keyboard-first manager: create, edit, run, stop, view logs,
and delete apps without a mouse. Press
.B ?
in the TUI for the live keybinding picker.
.TP
.BI "new " "name " \fB\-\-image\fR " ref " \fR[\fB\-\-preset\fR \fIp\fR] [\fB\-\-desc\fR \fId\fR] [\fB\-\-icon\fR \fIi\fR]
Create a new app definition from a preset template
.RI ( strict ,
the default;
.IR standard ;
or
.IR networked ).
The name comes first; flags follow it.
.B \-\-image
is validated under the image-trust rule (see
.B IMAGE TRUST
below). Fails if the app already exists.
.TP
.B list
List defined apps with their preset and image.
.TP
.BI "validate " name | app.toml
Parse and validate a definition, reporting every problem found (not just the first).
On success prints a one-line summary.
.TP
.BI "run " name | app.toml " " \fR[\fB\-\-exec\fR]
Build the launch plan. Without
.BR \-\-exec ,
this is a
.IR "dry run" :
it validates, then prints the exact
.BR podman (1)
command(s) that would run \(em including the derived-image build line and
Containerfile (if
.B app.install
is set), the
.B # WARNING
advisories (see
.BR ADVISORIES ),
and, for a
.I pasta
app, the three-step pod flow with the full
.BR nftables (8)
ruleset that would be enforced. With
.BR \-\-exec ,
it launches through the shared service (validate, build the derived image if stale,
lock down egress, then detach).
.TP
.BI "build " name | app.toml
(Re)build an app's derived image (\fBFROM\fR
.B app.image
plus the
.B app.install
layer). A plain
.B run
rebuilds automatically when the base or install line changes; this is the explicit
build, e.g. to pre-warm the image or retry a failed install line. Errors only when
.B app.install
is unset.
.TP
.BI "image search " term
Search the configured registries for an image \(em no browser required.
.TP
.BI "image resolve " ref
Resolve a mutable tag to its
.RB \(lq @sha256: \(rq
digest-pinned form, ready to paste into
.B app.image
(see
.BR "IMAGE TRUST" ).
.RB ( pin
is an alias for
.BR resolve .)
.TP
.B keys list
List the available TUI keybinding schemes; the active one is marked
.RB \(lq * \(rq.
These are
.IR "hzc's own" " TUI keys, not Hyprland desktop hotkeys."
.TP
.BR "keys show " [ \fIscheme\fR ]
Print the effective bindings of
.I scheme
(or the active scheme), grouped by screen.
.TP
.BI "keys set " scheme
Make
.I scheme
.RI ( default ", " vim ", or a custom scheme) the active one."
.TP
.BR "keys edit " [ \fIname\fR ]
Scaffold a custom copy of
.I name
(default
.IR default )
and open it in
.BR $EDITOR ;
re-validates on save.
.TP
.BR "keys validate " [ \fIscheme\fR ]
Validate
.I scheme
(or the active scheme).
.TP
.B keys path
Print the keybinding-scheme config directory.
.TP
.BI "term " name " " \fR[\fB\-\-shell\fR]
Open one more terminal into a
.B multiterminal
app's shared container, running the app's
.B command
(or, with
.BR \-\-shell ,
a shell). The shared container lives until the last terminal closes, unless the app
is
.BR background .
.TP
.BI "stop " name
Stop the app. Pod-aware: a
.I pasta
app's pod (which owns the filtered netns) is torn down as a unit.
.TP
.BI "restart " name
Restart the app. For a
.I pasta
app the pod is torn down and relaunched so the
.BR nftables (8)
ruleset is re-applied (it lives in the netns and is lost on a plain restart).
.TP
.BI "inspect " name
Run
.B podman inspect
on the app's container.
.TP
.BI "logs " name " " \fR[\fB\-f\fR]
Show the app's logs;
.B \-f
follows.
.TP
.BI "delete " name
Delete an app definition.
.SH IMAGE TRUST
Per architecture
.RB \(lq §5.5 \(rq,
a third-party
.B app.image
must be pinned by a
.I canonical
digest:
.RB \(lq @sha256: \(rq
followed by exactly 64 lowercase hex characters. Only locally built
.IR trusted-* " images may use a mutable local tag."
A definition that fails this is rejected at save and at launch. Use
.B hzc image resolve
to turn a tag into its pinned form. The pin is enforced because a config may be
shared, distributed as an example, or Nix-seeded: a reviewer reading the TOML must
be able to trust the digest, and the image is interpolated into a derived
Containerfile
.B FROM
line.
.SH ADVISORIES
A dry-run
.RB ( "run " "without " \-\-exec )
prints
.B "# WARNING"
lines \(em which validation allows but a reviewer should see \(em for:
.BR capabilities.extra
re-added past the
.B cap-drop all
baseline; a
.I pasta
allowlist containing an all-egress CIDR
.RB ( 0.0.0.0/0 " or " ::/0 );
and host device exposure via
.B display.gpu
.RI ( /dev/dri )
or
.B audio.legacy_alsa
.RI ( /dev/snd ).
The plan itself is unchanged.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/hyprzinc/apps/<name>.toml
App definitions. See
.BR hyprzinc-app (5).
.TP
.I ~/.config/hyprzinc/hzc/schemes/<name>.toml
Custom TUI keybinding schemes
.RB ( "hzc keys path" " prints this directory)."
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/hyprzinc/run/
Per-app
.BR flock (2)
state coordinating multiterminal lifecycle (no daemon).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B EDITOR
Editor used by the TUI "advanced" row and
.BR "hzc keys edit" .
Defaults to
.BR vim .
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Base for multiterminal runtime state.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Find and pin an image, then create a strict app:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hzc image resolve alpine:3.20
hzc new shell \-\-image docker.io/library/alpine@sha256:<64\ hex> \-\-preset strict
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview exactly what a launch would do, then run it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hzc run firefox            # dry run: prints the podman command(s)
hzc run firefox \-\-exec     # actually launch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Open a second terminal into a multiterminal dev box:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hzc term devbox \-\-shell
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B hzc
exits 0 on success and 1 on any error (a message is written to standard error,
prefixed
.RB \(lq "hzc: " \(rq).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hyprzinc-app (5),
.BR podman (1),
.BR nftables (8)
.PP
HyprZinc architecture (single source of truth):
.I docs/architecture.md
.SH AUTHORS
HyprZinc is developed by crispuscrew. Priority order: Stable, Secure, Beautiful.
